We know that students who have been involved in the traditions and the culture of the institution, they succeed better, they donate more back to the institution, all of those kinds of things.
I think all the camaraderie is just hard to measure how important it is.
calling every name at commencement and shaking every hand?
Yes.
Yeah, that's personalization in an impersonal time.
It really is.
Let's see, trying to think of some goofy.
Yeah.
Do you remember any examples of where somebody misunderstood the advice they'd received here?
Oh, goodness.
And did something that was completely contrary to what, but I thought you told me to do this, that, or the other?
Well, let me correct something.
I've noticed you've used the word advice a number of times.
And we don't do that, actually.
We honestly don't.
Well, there's several premise, you know, that first of all, we're all fallible.
And what we really try to do is make counseling a learning experience in that we
We really try to help people understand better what their problem situation is.
Sometimes people only have a 60% understanding of the nuances of what's lurking under that problem.
So we really try to illuminate all of the features of a problem area so a person has a comprehensive understanding.
And then what you do is you're really trying to
get an idea what their thoughts and feelings are about it, and then what their options are.
And we know in similar problem situations, option A may be good for one student, option D may be good for another.
And then what we try to do is once we make them rigorously ferret out what's best for them in terms of the consequences, then we work at supporting them in beginning to change their behavior and act on that plan.
But we don't select the plan for them or advise them in a certain way.
And the whole idea is they're the ones who have to make the change.
They're the ones who suffer the consequences of changing something.
And we don't have to live inside their skin if it goes badly.
So we're real careful.
A good example is we get students from alcoholic families where alcohol is a major player in family life and there are issues the family never talks about.
Call them like the dead elephants laying in the living room.
Everybody walks around them.
And students will come here and they learn to relate in odd ways then.
And then they try to do it here at A&M and it's not working for them.
And that brings them in.
And then you find that out and they finally say, I'm going to really start talking to my family about all this alcohol abuse and what it's doing to our family.
Well, I'll tell you, you get into a sick family scenario and all of the people who are participants in that sick family will work very hard to put you back into your former role and not allow this to happen.
So that's where the support of students becomes so important.
We don't advise them.
I mean, obviously, if they say, well, I think the way for me to solve this is to kill myself, we're naturally going to have an opinion about that.
But we really try to help people work through and think through.
The idea is that the next problem they come up against, hopefully they can use that as a learning experience to handle themselves, as opposed to having come back to us and say, well, what do you advise me to do this time, you know?
We don't want to make people dependent, so that's kind of the philosophy.
How often does a parent say thank you?
Periodically.
We have an interesting relationship with parents because we want to respond to them
in ways that we would want to be responded to if we were a parent and we were worried about our child, yet short of them continuing some kind of a parental control that restricts the student from learning and from handling their own affairs.
We really, of course by state law, we can't break confidentiality except in certain cases.
Child abuse, and I had one of those.
I got a report that an 18-year-old female was sexually abusing a 15-year-old male in an adjacent county.
I had to call the sheriff.
The one I like is elderly abuse.
You can't abuse me and you and get away with it.
Another one, of course, is threat to life.
You have the option of that.
But short of that, the student has to give us written permission to break confidentiality.
And so we're very respectful of that student.
See, we try to treat them as an adult.
And sometimes that's... I remember vividly I had a parent in my early years say, has my son John been in?
And I said, well, ma'am, I said, we have...
In those days, I said, we have 30 or 40 students coming in a day, so I don't know exactly.
I said, I could find out, but I don't know.
And she said, well, what was it she said to me?
Well, I'm his mother and I want to know.
And I said, well, ma'am, I said,
Boy, you try to do this delicately.
I said, you know, I said, please understand that if somebody called over the phone and wanted information about you, I have no way of corroborating who you are.
And then we have a state law that we have to be worried about.
And she said something about, well, yes, I wouldn't want my personal business discussed with somebody.
And I said, yes, ma'am.
I said, by the way, I said, if you really want to know, why don't you ask him?
And that was my way of trying to get the communication going.
I had a faculty member raise hell with me one day.
He wanted information about a student.
And I said, I can't give that.
I said, but if you'll have the student come over, they can sign a permission release, and then I can talk with you.
I don't want to go through all that stuff.
He said, who do you work for?
I said, Texas A&M University.
He said, so do I. He said, you know, I'm going to call President Vandervyrn.
I said, no, Mobley.
And Mobley was an American Psychological Association.
He was an industrial organizational psychologist.
And I said, hey, I encourage you to call the president.
Please call the president, because I want to hear him tell me that I'm going to break the law of the state of Texas.
I really want to hear that.
And so you get into those interesting things, you know.
Fascinating.
But does a parent ever call up and just say, I want to thank you for the assistance you gave?
Yeah.
We get that occasionally.
Not too often because a lot of times the parents don't even know their kids are in counseling.
Periodically.
How does a person then in this profession
What are their measurements of their success, their feel-good experiences?
Yeah.
We do, once every two years, we do a major client satisfaction survey is what we call it.
And that's done on a pretty good sample size of our clients.
And the feedback, and in fact, we just got our last report, the feedback is that not only were we
quite successful in helping people ameliorate the presenting problem they brought to us, but that the resolution has lasted.
It hasn't gone away, it hasn't dissipated, which you worry about that sometimes.
So that's the feedback we're getting directly from our clients.
And you've been doing that for how long?
Oh, probably 14 years, every other year.
How would the comparative report now?
It's staying pretty similar.
pretty high degree of what changes we have a whole lot of items like how did the receptionist greet you what did you think of the waiting area was it comfortable you know you get all those those variables will sometimes change but the essential quality of the counseling service that has stayed really high and and and boy like I said at East Texas State I had three people who were not
Well, they were good in their own way, but they were not good for a counseling center.
And it shows kids don't come in.
Or if they come in, they come in one time and they never come back.
During all these years, who have been the key, I'm not going to ask you anything but the positive.
Who have been the key members of the counseling staff?
Well, first of all, I would have to say Carrie Hope has been, she's been with me.
For 26 years, she's lived through the history of this center as much as I have.
She's been an intern here, a psychologist, an assistant director, an associate director.
She's physically designed the three centers we've been in.
She's a terribly bright and creative person.
She's been like a jack of all trades.
She does a wonderful job with the helpline.
upstairs that we have.
She's been very good.
Is she related to Landis?
Yeah, she's a daughter.
Oh, oh.
Gosh, we've had a host of such good people.
We've got about 17 directors in the United States who have come out of this center.
Really?
Probably, yeah.
We probably, I wouldn't doubt that more directors in recent years have come from this center than any center in the United States.
We've had a, and I hope that's, you know, initially we've made good hiring decisions, but like the director of counseling at the University of North Florida in Jacksonville, Terry DiNuzzo, she's been wonderful.
Laura Betor was a psychologist here for six years, great.
An African-American woman, Bernadine Duncan, who's now associate director of counseling at UH downtown.
She did a lot for the African-American students.
I used to kid her.
She had an African-American women's group that I would attend once in a while, and I once kid her, and I said, when are you going to have something for the men?
And she was kind of foxy anyway, and she said, boss, she always called me boss, boss, you want an African-American?
She said, I'll get you one.
And a week later, she went over the MSC and just started talking to those African-American males.
A week later, we had a group of African-American males over here, and minorities tend
statistically not to use counseling services very well.
We're very unique in that our proportion of minority students reflects their proportion in the student population.
Most campuses don't.
There, gee whiz, Ted Stachowiak on the current staff, he has created a new service delivery system to where we're not on the waiting list like we used to be.
Now we're working the staff harder.
But we don't have this.
I remember one year we had 95 students waiting to get in here.
And that used to worry me sick because we always get them in for one interview right away.
because we want to make sure nothing serious is going on.
And then they're told to call back if their situation deteriorates.
But you always worry about that 95 sitting out there, what might be going on.
And that used to make me crazy.
Normally, about how long would it take if a student called and said, I need help now?
Yeah.
If it's an emergency, they're going to be seen right away.
Oh, OK.
Yeah.
If we say to them, do you view this?
Do you see this as an emergency?
And they say yes.
So they define it.
They define, yes.
Student always defines what an emergency is.
Whether we agree or not, it's what they say.
Because I don't want to make the slip of saying, well, because we, I remember vividly one student about five years after I was here, who I remember standing at the receptionist counter and the student, the receptionist was saying, well, is this an emergency?
I said, well, probably I'll keep till Monday, you know.
Little kid overdosed that weekend.
See, I don't want to have to deal with that.
And are those who want immediate help, are they likely to communicate by telephone or in person?
Both.
We get them various ways.
More often they're going to come in here bodily, physically, and that would be the clear majority.
But we'll get them over the phone too, and sometimes that's tough because sometimes they won't reveal who they are.
Now, up in the help line at night, we have the ability to trace the phone number.
And of course, those people up there do not deal with suicide calls.
I pay five of our psychologists 3,000 a year extra to serve as backup duty.
And they immediately, the call is patched in to their phone, and they talk to the student directly.
And in all of these three decades, you must have, I presume, have coped with a student threatening another student's life, someone who has already attempted to take their own life.
What about somebody saying they're going to jump off a building?
Yeah, I had that happen to me.
directly.
I had a young man, very bright.
Physical stature was one that was sort of frail and sort of meek and bright.
And when he came to A&M, I requested his mental health records.
And he had to file that fat from a psychiatrist already.
And we were doing pretty good work.
And I remember one session where he suddenly jumped up out of the chair and said, I'm heading for the rotunda in the academic building.
I'm going to jump off the rotunda.
And he flew out the door.
And I remember I chased him down the hall.
And it wasn't hard for me.
I'm not a big guy.
But I pinned him up against the wall.
And I remember saying to him, I don't know why I did this.
It was totally spontaneous.
I said, you are not going to kill yourself on my campus.
Now get back in here, you know.
I remember, too, another situation, one of our consulting psychiatrists, we had a homicide threat.
By the way, homicide threats most typically come from graduate students.
They are either going to send the committee out in a box if they don't get the degree, PhD, or they accuse some faculty member of fooling out their wife.
Those are the two principles.
Undergraduates are less prone to do the homicide thing, although it happens.
And I remember we met the...
We had the husband come over who was very upset and we positioned him in the back of the office.
Me and the psychiatrist sat here and we arranged it where the woman came in 15 minutes later and she sat in a chair near the door.
And we were strategically positioned.
If he went at her, we would intercept and she could flee.
We did that.
That happened.
Oh, we had some of the other things.
We had a woman come in with a knife in her sock.
and become just belligerent and acting out.
We called the university police.
She needed the counselor in the groin.
We got her out to the elevator.
The police, she tried to knee one of the policemen in the groin.
They did the wonderful practical thing of standing on her feet, taking her down the elevator.
I had a Vietnamese student threaten to kill his wife who was living in Louisiana.
And so I, while he stayed in the room, I called her and warned her of that.
We used to follow, going off on a bad tangent, we used to follow the big California court case, the Tarasoff case, where a psychiatrist had failed to warn an intended victim that his client had made a threat against them.
And so we always operate on it.
The state of Texas, just two years ago, the Supreme Court had a case, and it's different in Texas.
You may or may not warn the intended victim, but whatever you do, you're responsible.
Yeah, we've had all manner of stuff that happened.
Better than soap operas.
And let's see, have you been called where somebody had a whole crowd in a room?
Let's see, at East Texas I was called where a kid had a knife and he was in the bushes outside of a house.
I'm trying to think.
No, we've had kids bring in weapons, but they haven't been agitated, obligeant, or hostile.
In fact, I've had a number of them give me the weapons and I've turned them over to the university police.
In fact, I had a funny incident with Elmer Schneider, who was, I don't know what his title is now, but he was chief then and under Bob Wyatt.
And I got a shotgun, got a kid to give me a shotgun.
Then we did counseling with him and had him under one of our two psychiatrists.
We have two full-time psychiatrists here.
And six months later, the psychiatrist wrote me a formal letter that, in his opinion, it was safe for him to have the weapon.
Well, when I turned the weapon over, first of all, Elmer said, you know, we can't have firearms on state property.
And I said, well, I said, I don't know what we're going to do with this, and I don't want this kid using it on himself.
And he said, well, okay, I'll take it.
He said, whose is it?
I said, Elmer, I can't tell you.
I said, you know, I can't break confidentiality.
And he said, well, all right, I'll take it.
Well, then doggone, I get the note from the psychiatrist six months later.
I said, Elmer, I need a shotgun.
He said, well, he said, how do I identify it?
Oh, God.
So he kids me about that all the time.
Yeah, we've had many interesting things happen.
All right.
In giving support and encouragement, John Colas deserves high credit.
Who else?
Oh, absolutely.
Really, the Student Affairs Department heads have always been extremely supportive.
Dennis Corrington, Carolyn Adair, Jim Reynolds, because they've all made referrals here, and I think they understand.
We're kind of a service where
I don't think we're in people's everyday awareness, but boy, when these department heads all of a sudden come across a kid, they want it right now.
And that's why we have people on emergency, you just spring into action quickly.
I don't have very many other questions.
What topics have we not?
I was historically, because I had tried to do my homework here and we've covered a lot of what I had.
One of the interesting things was when the old academic counseling center and the personal counseling service merged.
That was the result of a committee that Chuck McCandless headed.
And it was to study the role and scope of the Academic Counseling Center.
Interestingly, since that center reported to Academic Affairs, the committee was composed of all academic people.
Nobody on Student Affairs was on it.
And the bottom line was that they decided to dissolve that center.
And I don't know.
The director of the center then was Dr. Art Tollefson.
I have sometimes wondered, but I don't know if it's true.
I don't know if the institution wanted to get rid of him and that was the way they got rid of him or not, was to wipe out the department.
I have no idea.
I know he was crotchety and persnickety and difficult to deal with, but Chuck, I used to, when I played a lot of racquetball, I used to, you know, be changing clothes with Chuck in the locker room and got to know him real well, and he was
I just thoroughly enjoyed him and was tickled to death when we, I hope it doesn't show grabbing for power, but I was so glad when we finally could have one comprehensive center on the campus and that.
And that academic affairs group that did that, that was
That was a big thing because our center for college counseling centers is pretty comprehensive.
A lot of counseling centers in the United States are purely psychological services.
And I don't agree with that limited model.
I want a kid to be able to come in here if they're not making their grades and they're having trouble reading textbooks, taking objective exams, writing essay questions, time management, math anxiety.
I want them to be able to get help here.
If they're changing their major for the fifth time, we want to be able to help them.
If they're looking for an initial career direction, then we want to help them.
We also get them over to the career center.
The personal problems, the crisis intervention.
Now, we're not as comprehensive as like University of Maryland that has a child guidance clinic.
It has a speech and hearing clinic.
But we're a pretty comprehensive center.
And Chuck really, through that committee's work, allowed us to...
to become that.
We've just had, geez, and Malin Sutherland, Malin and I, I think he would admit, I'd say it right to him in the room, personality-wise we're probably very far apart, but, and the guy doesn't support me to support Wade Burch, he supports the center because of what it does for students, and he has been
Malin has been an unexpected and surprisingly beneficial person to this counseling center.
Now, we like to think it's because I think, I don't know if this is public knowledge, but one semester he did have academic trouble here at dear old A&M, and so I think he appreciates some of the things we did, but he has been wonderful.
Kibler, Bill Kibler has been, I always thought that after I worked for Coldus for 20 years,
that God would say, okay, Birch, you've had it good, now we're going to screw you for the next last seven years of your professional life.
And I've been reporting directly to Bill Kibler, and he's been wonderful.
When I need his help, he gives it to me.
He never micromanages.
He's never had to clean up, come over here and clean up anything.
They've been great.
And I, something I said in some of my retirement remarks, I mean, I will admit when I came to A&M, I heard this was a special place, but I thought, yeah, sure.
And having lived it now, I really do believe A&M is unique and different and special.
I really, and I'm not a graduate, but I really believe that.
And I believe, I believe A&M, it's, I mean, early when I was here, I was a little put off by if you don't have the Aggie ring, you know, you can never be.
I think that has lessened over the years and I think that's been good to be more inclusive in that because I think a lot of us who come here from the outside want to very much become part of A&M and it used to be that there were those roadblocks thrown up
I see that really dissipating over the years, and I think that's really good.
Sometimes I say to one of the hyper-conservatives on that point, I say, how long were you at A&M?
Well, I was here four and a half years.
I said, well, I got here in 1959.
How long does it take to become someone who understands or deserves to at least have an opinion?
Right.
What else have we... Oh, I think that's pretty much... Well, let's see.
I'm assuming that one of the most severe matters you all ever had to cope with was bonfire.
Oh, yes.
Yes.
Did that affect the people that you all counseled?
Yeah.
We saw a limited number of students in counseling, pure official counseling.
And they were the ones that were most dramatically affected.
And we did that because many of them suffered post-traumatic stress disorder where, you know, usually after about 30 days you presume people's appetites, concentration, ability to have fun and pursue fun experiences in life, that that's going to begin to come back.
But when they don't after a month, then you may have PTSD, maybe a parent.
And we saw some of the tougher
tougher cases of that.
But we also, well, I don't know how much you want to chat about that.
I got the call from Malin at about 4.45 a.m.
and he said, Wade, we've had a real bad accident out here at Bonfire.
Need you to come out.
I said, okay.
I called Ted Stachowiak, our associate director.
I said, Ted,
Why don't you come meet me?"
You know, and we went out there and we mingled among some of the students who had been and seen witness to that.
And then I immediately called an emergency 8 a.m.
staff meeting.
And we knew the university was going to have MSC 145 for the parents.
We knew they were going to set TVs up in the flag room of the MSC.
So I dispatched
about four or five of our psychologists out to the site to co-mingle with students, sent two to the room where the parents were, sent three to where the kids would be watching the TV reports.
So we scattered out and that was great for me because it allowed me to move from place to place and watch what was going on.
we immediately got a hold of groups of students in the Cadet Corps and in this North Residence Hall area because those were the two most affected groups.
So right away we got with groups of those students.
Our helpline kids, bless their hearts, instead of being on duty from four,
p.m.
to 8 a.m.
the next morning.
They voted, they elected, they came and told us they wanted to work the telephones 24 hours a day, 10 days in a row.
Did it over Thanksgiving.
Their parents brought up Thanksgiving meals to them here.
We normally get, you know, 15 to 30 calls a week.
We got 350 during that period.
We had the interesting phenomena of other groups coming in to help us.
And we had 68 mental health people from around the state, local and outside of our local community, volunteer to come in and help us.
We had a psychiatrist fly in from San Antonio, flew in here and just started working.
And it was interesting because all of a sudden you've got this cadre of people that can help,
But what we decided was we would try to use the locals first because they knew the A&M culture.
They were here.
If we needed to debrief with them, they'd be more accessible.
And then after the local people on campus, then we went to the private practitioners in Bryan College Station and then finally more to people who called from around the state.
We were out at the memorial services.
We were in the MSC at night.
We worked with the campus ministers in the chapel.
The staff just, boy, they were marvelous.
Looking back with the clear vision of hindsight.
Is there anything we didn't do that we might have done?
On the bonfire thing?
Well, I think the commission report and the actions that the president is taking are, I think, all of those.
Of us?
Yeah.
I think, honestly, I think we were ill-prepared.
Not ill-prepared.
We weren't as prepared as we should have been for a...
tragedy of that size I mean we had dealt with you know the flying club where they lost some students or the young man who fell asleep and ran over the people going into the fraternity party I mean things where it's you know three to six students but the enormity of this I don't think we were at all ready in fact one of the recommendations I made
internally to Malin was that the director of this center ought to be formally in charge of all of the mental health kinds of services that are rendered on that site because we had people like that had done the Oklahoma bombing they came in that was a Texas group that came in and that but you need some coordination of that we were I'll tell you my opinion of that was
that maybe all of us were not as well prepared as we should, but somehow everybody did their job professionally and it worked out very well.
And in that way we were very lucky.
Now, the people who came for counseling regarding Bonfire, were they most likely to have been the students that were present when the collapse?
Present or a very dear close friend.
Yeah, absolutely.
Oh yeah, yeah.
In fact, I had the unfortunate experience of telling one of the 12 families that their daughter had died.
I had never done that before.
College age population, you don't think of death, you know, and I remember
they they insisted on leaving the msc 145 where which was the protected area to keep the press away from them which was good and they had come out and were waiting as the firemen you know took the thing apart and for a while one of the methodist church brought a bus over here it was air conditioned and they had a bunch of people from the family and friends there and
chatted with them before we knew anything and then they went out again and sat behind those yellow tapes and finally the fireman came over to me and said somebody needs to tell the family that their daughter is dead and said but tell them, dissuade them from looking at the body because the body was so mangled we couldn't tell what gender the body was until we found a social security card and
So I said to the family, this was one of the two hard points for me.
I just walked over to them and I said, I need you to come with me back to the bus.
And I said it with some degree of authority in my voice because I didn't want them quibbling with me.
Fortunately, they followed me.
And then, you know, they all sat down.
I think they had an inkling what was coming.
And I finally, I just said,
I don't know how to tell you this, and then they knew, you know, and that kind of thing.
And then immediately, I and my secretary, interestingly, went right to the roommate over here in this residence hall complex and met with the roommate.
And we continued to follow students for a number of months.
One great thing was the Texas Psychological Association.
We put out a call.